with young ready to have you here so
you've had this amazing viewpoint and
perhaps fair to say that in the last few
years there have been some alarming
developments that you've seen what's
alarmed you most well do you know what
just listening to the earlier speakers I
can frame it in what they've been saying
climate change for instance cities the
threat to our environment and our and
our lives it basically also boils down
to understanding the truth and to be
able to get to the truth of what we're
talking about in order to really be able
to solve it
so if 99.9% of the science on climate is
empirical scientific evidence but it's
competing almost equally with a handful
of deniers that is not the truth that is
the epitome of fake news and so for me
the last you know few years certainly
this last year has crystallized the
notion of fake news in a way that's
truly alarming and not just some slogan
to be thrown around because when you
can't distinguish between the truth and
fake news you have a very much more
difficult time trying to solve some of
the great issues that we face hmm
well you've been involved in this
question of you know what is balance
what is truth what is in partiality for
a long time yeah you're on frontlines
reporting though the Balkan wars 25 25
years ago I guess yeah and back then you
famously said by calling out human right
abuses and you said look there are some
situations one simply cannot be neutral
about because when you are neutral you
are an accomplice so do you feel that
today's journalists aren't heeding that
advice about balance well look I think
you know for journalists objectivity is
the golden rule but I think sometimes we
don't understand what objectivity means
and I actually learnt this very very
young in my career which was during the
Balkan where I was I was young then it
was about 25 years ago and what we faced
was the wholesale violation
not just of human rights but all the way
to ethnic cleansing and genocide and
that has been adjudicated in the highest
war crimes court in the world so we know
what we were seeing trying to tell the
world what we were seeing brought us
accusations of bias of siding with one
side of not seeing the whole side and
just you know trying to tell one story I
particularly impersonally was accused of
siding with for instance the citizens of
Sarajevo siding with the Moslems
because they were the minority who were
being attacked by Christians on the Serb
side in in this area and I we worried me
it worried me that I was being accused
of this I thought maybe I was wrong
maybe I had forgotten what objectivity
was but then I started to understand
that what people wanted was actually not
to do anything not to step in not to
change the situation not to find a
solution and so their fake news at that
time their lie at that time including
our governments our democratically
elected governments with values and
principles of human rights their lie was
to say that all sides equally guilty
that this has been centuries of ethnic
hatred
whereas we knew that wasn't true that
one side had decided to kill slaughter
and ethnically cleanse another side so
that is where for me
I understood that objectivity means
giving all sides in equal hearing and
and talking to all sides but not
treating all sides equally not creating
a forced moral equivalence or factual
equivalence and when you come up against
that that crisis point in situations of
grave violations of international and
humanitarian law if you don't understand
what you're seeing if you don't
understand the truth and if you get
trapped in the fake news paradigm then
you are an accomplice hmm and I refuse
to be accomplished to genocide
so they've always been these propaganda
battles and and you were courageous in
taking the stand you took back then
today there's a whole new way though in
which news seems to be becoming fake how
would you characterize that well look I
am really alarmed and everywhere I look
you know we're buffeted by it obviously
when the leader of the free world when
the most powerful person in the entire
world which is the president of the
United States this is the most important
most powerful country in the whole world
economically militarily politically in
every which way and it seeks to
obviously promote its values and power
around the world so when we journalists
who only seek the truth I mean that is
our mission we go around the world
looking for the truth in order to be
everybody's eyes and ears people who
can't go out in various parts of the
world to figure out what's going on
about things that are vitally important
to our own you know everybody's health
and security so when you have a major
world leader accusing you of fake news
it has a an exponential ripple effect
and what it does is it starts to chip
away at not just our credibility but at
people's minds but you know people who
look at us maybe they're thinking why if
the President of the United States says
that maybe somewhere there's a truth in
there presidents have always been
critical of the media not this way so so
tour extent
I mean someone someone a couple years
ago looking at at the avalanche of
information pouring through Twitter and
Facebook and so forth might have said
look our democracies are healthier than
they've ever been there's more news than
ever of course presidents will say what
they'll say but everyone else can say
what will they say what's not to like
how is how is there an extra danger so I
wish that was true I wish that the
proliferation of platforms upon which we
get our information meant that there was
a proliferation of truth and
transparency and depth and accuracy but
I think the opposite has happened you
know I'm a little bit of a Luddite I
will confess even when we started to
talk about the information superhighway
which was a long time ago before social
media Twitter and all the rest of it I
was actually really afraid that that
would put people into certain lanes and
tunnels and have them just focusing on
areas of their own interests instead of
seeing the broad picture and I'm afraid
to say that with algorithms with
logarithms with whatever the isms are
the direct us into all these particular
channels of information that seems to be
happening right now
I mean you know people have written
about this phenomenon people have said
that yes the internet came its promise
was to you know exponentially explode
our access to the more democracy more
information you know less bias more
varied information and in fact the
opposite has happened and so that for me
is incredibly dangerous and you know
again where you are the president of
this country and you say things it also
gives leaders in other undemocratic
countries the cover to affront us even
even worse and to really whack us and
their own journalists with this bludgeon
of fake news what extent is what
happened though in part just an
unintended consequence that you know the
media traditional media that you worked
in had this curation mediation role
where where certain law
were observed certain stories would be
rejected because they weren't credible
but now that the standard for
publication and for amplification is
just interest attention excitement click
did it get clicked on send it out there
and that that's that's what's is is that
part of what's cause the probably I
think it's a big problem and we saw this
in the election of 2016 where the idea
of clickbait was very sexy and very
attractive and so all these fake news
sites and fake news items were not just
haphazardly and by happenstance being
put out there there's been a whole
industry in the creation of fake news in
parts of Eastern Europe wherever and
then you know it's planted in real space
and in cyberspace so I think that you
know that also the the ability of our of
our technology to proliferate this stuff
for the kind of speed of sound or light
just about you know we've never faced
that before and we've never faced such a
massive amount of information which is
not curated by those whose profession
leads them to abide by the truth to
fact-check and to maintain a code of
conduct and again a code of professional
ethics I mean many people here may know
people who work at Facebook and Twitter
and Google and so on they all seem like
great people having a good intention
let's assume that what would you if you
could speak with the leaders of those
companies what would you say to them
well you know what I'm I'm sure they are
incredibly well intention and they
certainly developed an unbelievable game
changing system where everybody's
connected on this thing called Facebook
and they've created a massive economy
for themselves and an amazing amount of
income I would just say guys you know
it's time to to wake up and smell the
coffee and look at what's happening to
us right now
Mark Zuckerberg wants to create a global
community I want to know what is that
global community going to look like I
want to know where the codes of conduct
actually are mark zuckerberg said
and I mean I don't blame him he probably
believed this that it was crazy to think
that the Russians or anybody else could
be tinkering and messing around with
this Avenue and what have we just
learned in the last few weeks that
actually there has been a major problem
in that regard and now they're having to
investigate it and figure it out yes
they're trying to to do what they can
now to prevent the rise of fake news but
you know it went pretty unrestricted for
a long long time so I guess I would say
you know you guys are brilliant at
technology let's figure out another
algorithm can we not an algorithm that
includes journalistic how they do it but
somehow you know filter out the the crap
you know and not just the unintentional
okay but the deliberate lies that are
planted by people who've been doing this
as a matter of warfare for decades the
Soviets the Russians they are the
masters of war by other means of hybrid
warfare and this is a this is this is
what they've decided to do it worked in
the United States it didn't work in
France it hasn't worked in Germany
during the elections there where they've
tried to interfere
the president of France right now
Emmanuel macron took a very tough stand
and confronted it head-on as did Angela
Merkel that there's some hope to be
heard from some of this is inevitable
but the world learns we see we get
fooled once maybe we get fooled again
but maybe not the third time
but I think in this regard there's so
much of it is also about technology that
the technology has to also be given some
kind of moral compass I know I'm talking
nonsense but you know what I mean we
need a filter the crap algorithm yeah
with moral company I think it's a small
technology moral compasses moral
technology I think it's great you know
what I mean talk to me just a minute
about leadership you've had a chance to
speak with so many people across the
world I think for some of us I speak for
myself I don't know father Fitz feel
this there's there's kind of been a
disappointment of
where are the leaders you know so many
of us have been disappointed Hong
sang-soo gee what's happened recently
it's like no another one bites the dust
you know it's it's it's heartbreaking
how who have you met who you have been
impressed by inspired by well you know
when you when you talk about the world
in crisis which is absolutely true and
those of us who you know spend our whole
lives immersed in this crisis you know I
mean we're all on the verge of a nervous
breakdown
so it's it's pretty stressful right now
and you're right you know there is this
perceived and actual vacuum of
leadership and it's not me saying it I
ask all these whether whoever I'm
talking to I ask about leadership I was
speaking to the outgoing president of
Liberia today Ellen Sirleaf Johnson who
in three weeks time will be one of the
very rare heads of an African country
who actually abides by the Constitution
and gives up power after her proscribed
term and she has said she wants to do
that as a as a lesson but when I asked
her about leadership and I gave her a
quick fire round of certain names and I
presented her with the name of the new
French president Emmanuel macron and she
said I said so what do you think when I
say his name and she said shaping up
potentially to be a leader to fill our
current leadership vacuum so I thought
that was really interesting and
yesterday I happened to have an
interview with him I'm very proud to say
I got his first international interview
it was great it was yesterday and I was
really impressed I mean I don't know
whether I should be saying that in an
open forum but I was really impressed
right you know because and it could be
just because it was his first interview
but I asked questions and you know what
he answered them
[Laughter]
there was no spin there was no wiggle
and waggle there was no spent five
minutes to come back to the point I
didn't have to keep interrupting which
I've become rather renowned for dream
because I want people to answer the
question and he answered me and it was
pretty pretty interesting and he said
tell me what he said I know you go ahead
okay you've talked about nationalism and
tribalism here today I asked him how did
you have the guts to confront the
prevailing winds of anti-globalization
nationalism populism when you could see
what happened in brexit where you could
see what happened in the United States
and what might have happened in many
European elections at the beginning of
2017 and and he said for me nationalism
means war we have seen it before we have
lived through it before on my continent
and I am very clear about that so he was
not going to just for political
expediency embrace the kind of
lowest-common-denominator that had been
embraced in in other political elections
and he stood against marine lepen who
was a very dangerous woman last question
for you Christian
tell us about ideas worth spreading if
you could plant one idea into the minds
of everyone here what would that be I
would say really be careful where you
get your information from really take
responsibility for what you read listen
to and watch make sure that you go to
the trusted brands to get your main
information no matter whether you have a
wide eclectic you know intake really
stick with the brand names that you know
because in this world right now at this
moment right now our crises our
challenges our problems are so severe
that unless we are all engaged as global
citizens who appreciate the truth who
understand science empirical evidence
and facts
then we are just simply going to be
wandering along to a potential
catastrophe so I would say the truth and
then I would come back to Emmanuel
macron and and talk about love I would
say that there's not enough not enough
love going around and I asked him to
tell me about love I said you know your
your marriage is the subject of global
obsession what can you tell me about
love what does it mean to you I've never
asked a president or an elected leader
about now I thought I'd try it and he
said he we you know he actually answered
it and he said you know I love my wife
she is part of me we've been together
for decades but here's where it really
counted what really stuck with me he
said it is so important for me to have
somebody at home who tells me the truth
so you see I brought it home all right
so there you go truth and love
ideas are spreading
[Applause]
thank you